Overview of MEAI.Evaluation library (#44901)
dotnet/docs: docs/ai/conceptual/evaluation-libraries.md

The evaluation libraries, which are built on top of the [Microsoft.Extensions.AI abstractions](../ai-extensions.md), are composed of the following NuGet packages:

- [📦 Microsoft.Extensions.AI.Evaluation](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.Extensions.AI.Evaluation) – Defines the core abstractions and types for supporting evaluation.
- [📦 Microsoft.Extensions.AI.Evaluation.Quality](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.Extensions.AI.Evaluation.Quality) – Contains evaluators that assess the quality of LLM responses in an app according to metrics such as relevance, fluency, coherence, and truthfulness.
- [📦 Microsoft.Extensions.AI.Evaluation.Reporting](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.Extensions.AI.Evaluation.Reporting) – Contains support for caching LLM responses, storing the results of evaluations, and generating reports from that data.
- [📦 Microsoft.Extensions.AI.Evaluation.Console](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.Extensions.AI.Evaluation.Console) – A command-line tool for generating reports and managing evaluation data.

> 

Reviewer: Should we include `Microsoft.Extensions.AI.Evaluation.Reporting.Azure` here as well?

Reviewer 2: This is the blurb we use for it in the package readmes -

> - [Microsoft.Extensions.AI.Evaluation.Reporting.Azure](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.Extensions.AI.Evaluation.Reporting.Azure) - Supports the Microsoft.Extensions.AI.Evaluation.Reporting library with an implementation for caching LLM responses and storing the evaluation results in an Azure Storage container.

| Metric                             | Description                                  | Evaluator type |
|------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------|----------------|
| Relevance, truth, and completeness | How effectively a response addresses a query | <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.AI.Evaluation.Quality.RelevanceTruthAndCompletenessEvaluator> |
| Fluency                            | Grammatical accuracy, vocabulary range, sentence complexity, and overall readability| <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.AI.Evaluation.Quality.FluencyEvaluator> |
| Coherence                          | The logical and orderly presentation of ideas | <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.AI.Evaluation.Quality.CoherenceEvaluator> |
| Equivalence                        | The similarity between the generated text and its ground truth with respect to a query | <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.AI.Evaluation.Quality.EquivalenceEvaluator> |
| Groundedness                       | How well a generated response aligns with the given context | <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.AI.Evaluation.Quality.GroundednessEvaluator> |

> You can also customize to add your own evaluations by implementing the <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.AI.Evaluation.IEvaluator> interface or, for a chat bot, by extending the <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.AI.Evaluation.Quality.ChatConversationEvaluator> class.

Reviewer 2: I think it may be better to leave out the `ChatConversationEvaluator` - this is a base class we use for all evaluators that ship as part of the library - but it may not be the best place to start for custom evaluators. It may also be misleading to say that `ChatConversationEvaluator` only applies for chat bots - it actually applies to any evaluations that leverage an LLM / AI (even if the app under test is not a chat bot).

Alternatively, we could just say that we have some base classes available.

```suggestion
You can also customize to add your own evaluations by implementing the <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.AI.Evaluation.IEvaluator> interface. The library also ships with some base classes that you could extend for this - see <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.AI.Evaluation.Quality.ChatConversationEvaluator> and <<xref:Microsoft.Extensions.AI.Evaluation.Quality.SingleNumericMetricEvaluator>.
```

## Cached responses

The library uses *response caching* functionality, which means responses from the AI model are persisted in a cache. In subsequent runs, if the request parameters (prompt and model) are unchanged, responses are then served from the cache to enable faster execution and lower cost.

> 

Reviewer 2: We should also mention the reporting functionality that is included.

The library contains support for storing evaluation results and generating reports (and we could include a screenshot of an example report).

The `aieval` dotnet tool which ships as part of the `Microsoft.Extensions.AI.Evaluation.Console` package above, also includes functionality for generating reports and managing the stored evaluation data and cached responses.
